measured_boot.md, before:

# Measured Boot

Measured boot is a security mechanism designed to verify that all the firmware
and software executed during the boot process are trusted by measuring them
and documenting the measurements for future validation.

Contrary to verified boot[^VerifiedBoot], measured boot does not prevent
untrusted code from being executed, but it makes it impossible for the execution
of such code to go undetected.

[^VerifiedBoot]: [Verified Boot Page](./verified_boot_main.md)

## Measured Boot and the Trusted Platform Module

The Trusted Platform Module (TPM) is a secure cryptoprocessor, a dedicated
microprocessor seperate from the CPU, able to perform cryptographic operations
in a secure, tamper resistant environment. The TPM was created by the
Trusted Computing Group, which maintains and develops its
specification[^TPM_Spec]. The second edition of the specification is published
as the is the ISO/IEC 11889[^TPM_standard] standard.

The Trusted Platform Module is often used in modern systems in the process of
measured boot as the Root of Trust for Storage and the
Root of Trust for Reporting.

### Root of Trust for Storage

The TPM contains a volatile and non-volatile storage, which are not directly
available to the rest of the system and are guarded by the TPM.
Thanks to these storages, the TPM can be used as the the Root of Trust for
Storage.

#### Platform Configuration Register (PCR)

The PCRs[^TPM_spec_11-6-2] are small secure memory locations in the TPM which
can be read by the system freely, but cannot be directly written to.
A PCR can only be modified by:

- resetting[^TPM_spec_17-1]
- extending[^TPM_spec_17-2]

Extending a PCR is a key operation in the process of measured boot using TPM.
Extending a hash consists of appending some data to the bytes of the hash and
calculating the hash of the resulting bytes sequence.
Every measured boot measurement is recorded by adding it to a measurement log
and performing a hash extension of a value in a PCR and the measured component's
digest. The resulting hash value is then set as the new value of
the PCR by the TPM.

The integrity of the measurement log can be verified by calculating and
extending all the digests in the log. The resulting value can be compared
against the one saved in a PCR as any change to the chain of measured components
will result in a different hash value in the end.

Comparing the values in PCRs to some well-known ones allows to verify the
integrity of all the components measured during the process of measured boot
in one operation.

### Root of Trust for Reporting

The TPM allows to ensure the integrity and authenticity of the data read from
its storage. Because of that it can act as the
Root of Trust for Reporting of the data stored in the TPM's storage.

One way this can be achieved is by creating a HMAC[^NIST_HMAC] session with the
TPM[^TPM_spec_17-7-2]. The PCR value will be provided alongside a HMAC allowing
for verifying that it comes from the TPM chip and was not altered in any way.

### Not a Root of Trust for Measurements

The TPM can not act as the RTM, because it is not able to initiate the
measurements. The TPM is only a tool which is operated by the CPU[^TPM_spec_34-1].
The TPM can securely store and report its storage allowing for recording
the platform state reliably, but the whole process is controlled by the code
running on the CPU.

## Static and Dynamic RTM

Measured Boot can be performed basing on: Static RTM or Dynamic RTM.
Achieving measured boot using the two Roots of Trust differ in how the process
is performed and each has its strenghts and shortcomings. The two techniques can
even be used together to achieve the best results[^Intel_txt_security_paper].

### SRTM

The Static Root of Trust for Measurements creates a Chain of Trust, which
starts with the first code executed on the CPU. The code is often read only,
proprietary and provided by the hardware vendor. From there, every executed
software is being measured and added to the chain of trust extending the
Trusted Computing Base. The process is simple, but the resulting
Trusted Computing Base can end up being large and its security can be difficult
to audit.

### DRTM

The main difference in Dynamic Root of Trust for Measurement is that the RTM
does not start with the first code executed on the CPU, but with the execution
of a special CPU instruction
(Intel - SINIT[^Intel_txt_security_paper], AMD - SKINIT[^AMD_DRTM_guide]).

This allows to exclude the boot code, the firmware and the bootloader, from
the TCB by allowing them to run during platform boot, but ensuring they won't
affect the security of the platform after the special D-RTM CPU instruction
is executed. The code executed after the DRTM initialization instruction is said
to run in a measured environment (Intel), or a secure execution environment
(AMD).

### Why use SRTM and DRTM at the same time

Because modern CPUs include features like the Intel ME and AMD ASP, which are
more privileged than any other code on the CPU, the environment in which the
platform will execute code after the DRTM initialization instruction can not be
entirely hermetized from them.

For this reason SRTM and DRTM should be used together[^Intel_txt_security_paper_srtm_and_drtm],
so that the highly priviledged components like Intel ME and AMD ASP can be
verified using SRTM, and the code running in a measured environment created
using the DRTM, while not entirely hermetized, can at least depend on the
SRTM measurements.

This way the TCB of the SRTM can be reduced to the highly priviledged hardware
components that can affect the measured environment of the DRTM, and the TCB
of the DRTM can be left unchanged, and minimal.

### Pros and cons of SRTM and DRTM

|Criterion|SRTM|DRTM|
|--|--|--|
|First measurements|First CPU instructions|Anywhere and anything|
|Size of TCB|Large|Minimal|
|Implementation and use|Simple|Complex|
|Hardware support|Not required|Required|

[^Intel_txt_security_paper]: https://www.intel.com/content/dam/www/public/us/en/documents/white-papers/trusted-execution-technology-security-paper.pdf
[^AMD_DRTM_guide]: https://www.amd.com/content/dam/amd/en/documents/epyc-technical-docs/user-guides/58453.pdf
[^Intel_txt_security_paper_srtm_and_drtm]: Intel TXT Security Paper, Details: Establishing a root of
trust with Intel TXT for Servers, paragraph 3. starting with "Intel developed Intel TXT architecture for servers...", https://www.intel.com/content/dam/www/public/us/en/documents/white-papers/

## EK and hierarchies

[^TPM_standard]: https://www.iso.org/standard/66513.html
[^TPM_Spec]: https://trustedcomputinggroup.org/wp-content/uploads/TPM-2.0-1.83-Part-1-Architecture.pdf
[^TPM_spec_11-6-2]: Section 11.6.2, Platform Configuration Registers (PCR), https://trustedcomputinggroup.org/wp-content/uploads/TPM-2.0-1.83-Part-1-Architecture.pdf
[^TPM_spec_17-1]: Section 17.1, Initializing PCR, https://trustedcomputinggroup.org/wp-content/uploads/TPM-2.0-1.83-Part-1-Architecture.pdf
[^TPM_spec_17-2]: Section 17.2, Extend of a PCR, https://trustedcomputinggroup.org/wp-content/uploads/TPM-2.0-1.83-Part-1-Architecture.pdf
[^TPM_spec_17-7-2]: 17.7.2 Authorization Set, https://trustedcomputinggroup.org/wp-content/uploads/TPM-2.0-1.83-Part-1-Architecture.pdf
[^NIST_HMAC]: NIST FIPS 198-1, The Keyed-Hash Message Authentication Code (HMAC), https://nvlpubs.nist.gov/nistpubs/FIPS/NIST.FIPS.198-1.pdf
[^TPM_spec_34-1]: 34.1 Hardware Core Root of Trust Measurement (H-CRTM) Event Sequence, Introduction, https://trustedcomputinggroup.org/wp-content/uploads/TPM-2.0-1.83-Part-1-Architecture.pdf
PCRs
Sealing/unsealing operations
Difference between static and dynamic RTM
EK and hierarchies

Short (1-2 sentences max) description of differences between measured and verified boot, with link to verified boot page.

Commit message:

measured_boot: TPM Seal and Unseal short description
Signed-off-by: Filip Gołaś <filip.golas@3mdeb.com>

measured_boot.md, after:

# Measured Boot

Measured boot is a security mechanism designed to verify that all the firmware
and software executed during the boot process are trusted by measuring them
and documenting the measurements for future validation.

Contrary to verified boot[^VerifiedBoot], measured boot does not prevent
untrusted code from being executed, but it makes it impossible for the execution
of such code to go undetected.

[^VerifiedBoot]: [Verified Boot Page](./verified_boot_main.md)

## Measured Boot and the Trusted Platform Module

The Trusted Platform Module (TPM) is a secure cryptoprocessor, a dedicated
microprocessor seperate from the CPU, able to perform cryptographic operations
in a secure, tamper resistant environment. The TPM was created by the
Trusted Computing Group, which maintains and develops its
specification[^TPM_Spec]. The second edition of the specification is published
as the is the ISO/IEC 11889[^TPM_standard] standard.

The Trusted Platform Module is often used in modern systems in the process of
measured boot as the Root of Trust for Storage and the
Root of Trust for Reporting.

### Root of Trust for Storage

The TPM contains a volatile and non-volatile storage, which are not directly
available to the rest of the system and are guarded by the TPM.
Thanks to these storages, the TPM can be used as the the Root of Trust for
Storage.

#### Platform Configuration Register (PCR)

The PCRs[^TPM_spec_11-6-2] are small secure memory locations in the TPM which
can be read by the system freely, but cannot be directly written to.
A PCR can only be modified by:

- resetting[^TPM_spec_17-1]
- extending[^TPM_spec_17-2]

Extending a PCR is a key operation in the process of measured boot using TPM.
Extending a hash consists of appending some data to the bytes of the hash and
calculating the hash of the resulting bytes sequence.
Every measured boot measurement is recorded by adding it to a measurement log
and performing a hash extension of a value in a PCR and the measured component's
digest. The resulting hash value is then set as the new value of
the PCR by the TPM.

The integrity of the measurement log can be verified by calculating and
extending all the digests in the log. The resulting value can be compared
against the one saved in a PCR as any change to the chain of measured components
will result in a different hash value in the end.

Comparing the values in PCRs to some well-known ones allows to verify the
integrity of all the components measured during the process of measured boot
in one operation.

### Root of Trust for Reporting

The TPM allows to ensure the integrity and authenticity of the data read from
its storage. Because of that it can act as the
Root of Trust for Reporting of the data stored in the TPM's storage.

One way this can be achieved is by creating a HMAC[^NIST_HMAC] session with the
TPM[^TPM_spec_17-7-2]. The PCR value will be provided alongside a HMAC allowing
for verifying that it comes from the TPM chip and was not altered in any way.

### Not a Root of Trust for Measurements

The TPM can not act as the RTM, because it is not able to initiate the
measurements. The TPM is only a tool which is operated by the CPU[^TPM_spec_34-1].
The TPM can securely store and report its storage allowing for recording
the platform state reliably, but the whole process is controlled by the code
running on the CPU.

### Data Sealing and Unsealing

Sealing and Unsealing is a functionality of the TPM that allows saving any data
in a Shielded Location [^TPM_spec_4-89] where the access to the data is
controlled by the Autorization Subsystem [^TPM_spec_11-5] where a set of
policies can be used to control the access to the data.

The process of saving the data is called `sealing`. Such data can only be
`unsealed` if the given set of Policies is satisfied.

Sealing an object with an unseal policy so that a set of PCRs has to have
defined values (PolicyPCR) can be used to make sure a secret is only revealed
if the platform is in an expected state, that is no untrusted code was executed
up to a given point. Sealing a piece of data crucial for the boot process,
like the disk password, can prevent the platform from booting and
potentially exposing sensitive data when the platform is not in a trusted
state.

An example of a more complex unseal policy is given in the TPM specification
where a PolicyPCR and a PolicyAuthorize are used together as alternatives
to allow unsealing the secret during a BIOS update. The Update changes the
PCR values making the PolicyPCR fail, but using a signature from the
platform OEM supplying the BIOS update the PolicyAuthorize is satisfied
and the keys are unsealed by the TPM.[^TPM_spec_19-7-11]

## Static and Dynamic RTM

Measured Boot can be performed basing on: Static RTM or Dynamic RTM.
Achieving measured boot using the two Roots of Trust differ in how the process
is performed and each has its strenghts and shortcomings. The two techniques can
even be used together to achieve the best results[^Intel_txt_security_paper].

### SRTM

The Static Root of Trust for Measurements creates a Chain of Trust, which
starts with the first code executed on the CPU. The code is often read only,
proprietary and provided by the hardware vendor. From there, every executed
software is being measured and added to the chain of trust extending the
Trusted Computing Base. The process is simple, but the resulting
Trusted Computing Base can end up being large and its security can be difficult
to audit.

### DRTM

The main difference in Dynamic Root of Trust for Measurement is that the RTM
does not start with the first code executed on the CPU, but with the execution
of a special CPU instruction
(Intel - SINIT[^Intel_txt_security_paper], AMD - SKINIT[^AMD_DRTM_guide]).

This allows to exclude the boot code, the firmware and the bootloader, from
the TCB by allowing them to run during platform boot, but ensuring they won't
affect the security of the platform after the special D-RTM CPU instruction
is executed. The code executed after the DRTM initialization instruction is said
to run in a measured environment (Intel), or a secure execution environment
(AMD).

### Why use SRTM and DRTM at the same time

Because modern CPUs include features like the Intel ME and AMD ASP, which are
more privileged than any other code on the CPU, the environment in which the
platform will execute code after the DRTM initialization instruction can not be
entirely hermetized from them.

For this reason SRTM and DRTM should be used together[^Intel_txt_security_paper_srtm_and_drtm],
so that the highly priviledged components like Intel ME and AMD ASP can be
verified using SRTM, and the code running in a measured environment created
using the DRTM, while not entirely hermetized, can at least depend on the
SRTM measurements.

This way the TCB of the SRTM can be reduced to the highly priviledged hardware
components that can affect the measured environment of the DRTM, and the TCB
of the DRTM can be left unchanged, and minimal.

### Pros and cons of SRTM and DRTM

|Criterion|SRTM|DRTM|
|--|--|--|
|First measurements|First CPU instructions|Anywhere and anything|
|Size of TCB|Large|Minimal|
|Implementation and use|Simple|Complex|
|Hardware support|Not required|Required|

[^Intel_txt_security_paper]: https://www.intel.com/content/dam/www/public/us/en/documents/white-papers/trusted-execution-technology-security-paper.pdf
[^AMD_DRTM_guide]: https://www.amd.com/content/dam/amd/en/documents/epyc-technical-docs/user-guides/58453.pdf
[^Intel_txt_security_paper_srtm_and_drtm]: Intel TXT Security Paper, Details: Establishing a root of
trust with Intel TXT for Servers, paragraph 3. starting with "Intel developed Intel TXT architecture for servers...", https://www.intel.com/content/dam/www/public/us/en/documents/white-papers/

[^TPM_standard]: https://www.iso.org/standard/66513.html
[^TPM_Spec]: https://trustedcomputinggroup.org/wp-content/uploads/TPM-2.0-1.83-Part-1-Architecture.pdf
[^TPM_spec_11-6-2]: Section 11.6.2, Platform Configuration Registers (PCR), https://trustedcomputinggroup.org/wp-content/uploads/TPM-2.0-1.83-Part-1-Architecture.pdf
[^TPM_spec_4-84]: Section 4, definition 84, Sealed Object Data, https://trustedcomputinggroup.org/wp-content/uploads/TPM-2.0-1.83-Part-1-Architecture.pdf
[^TPM_spec_4-89]: Section 4, definition 89, Shielded Location, https://trustedcomputinggroup.org/wp-content/uploads/TPM-2.0-1.83-Part-1-Architecture.pdf
[^TPM_spec_11-6-3]: Section 11.6.3 Object Store, https://trustedcomputinggroup.org/wp-content/uploads/TPM-2.0-1.83-Part-1-Architecture.pdf
[^TPM_spec_11-5]: Section 11.5 Authorization Subsystem, https://trustedcomputinggroup.org/wp-content/uploads/TPM-2.0-1.83-Part-1-Architecture.pdf
[^TPM_spec_17-1]: Section 17.1, Initializing PCR, https://trustedcomputinggroup.org/wp-content/uploads/TPM-2.0-1.83-Part-1-Architecture.pdf
[^TPM_spec_17-2]: Section 17.2, Extend of a PCR, https://trustedcomputinggroup.org/wp-content/uploads/TPM-2.0-1.83-Part-1-Architecture.pdf
[^TPM_spec_17-7-2]: 17.7.2 Authorization Set, https://trustedcomputinggroup.org/wp-content/uploads/TPM-2.0-1.83-Part-1-Architecture.pdf
[^TPM_spec_19-7-11]: Section 19.7.11 Modification of Policies, https://trustedcomputinggroup.org/wp-content/uploads/TPM-2.0-1.83-Part-1-Architecture.pdf
[^NIST_HMAC]: NIST FIPS 198-1, The Keyed-Hash Message Authentication Code (HMAC), https://nvlpubs.nist.gov/nistpubs/FIPS/NIST.FIPS.198-1.pdf
[^TPM_spec_34-1]: 34.1 Hardware Core Root of Trust Measurement (H-CRTM) Event Sequence, Introduction, https://trustedcomputinggroup.org/wp-content/uploads/TPM-2.0-1.83-Part-1-Architecture.pdf
